Allow trailing comma in comma-separated lists (#2344)
swiftlang/swift-evolution: proposals/nnnn-trailing-comma-lists.md

`split(separator)` and `split(separator:maxSplits)` are both valid calls but you can't easily switch between them without adding/removing the trailing comma.

```swift
let numbers = [1, 2, 0, 3, 4, 0, 0, 5]
    
let subsequences = numbers.split(
	separator: 0,
//        maxSplits: 1
) ❌ Unexpected ',' separator
```

### The Language Evolved

Back in 2016, a similar [proposal](https://github.com/swiftlang/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0084-trailing-commas.md) with a narrower scope was reviewed and rejected for Swift 3 but since that time the language has evolved substantially that changed the basis for rejection. The code style that "puts the terminating right parenthesis on a line following the arguments to that call" has been widely adopted by community, swift standard library codebase, swift-format, docc documentation and Xcode. Therefore, not encouraging or endorsing this code style doesn't hold true anymore.

> The language  has also seen the introduction of [parameter packs](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0393-parameter-packs.md), which allows more APIs that are comma-separated lists at call site and would benefit from trailing comma, and code generation tools like plugins and macros that with trailing comma support wouldn't have to worry about a special condition for the last element when generating comma-separated lists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The language has also seen the introduction of [parameter packs](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0393-parameter-packs.md), which enables APIs that are generic over variable numbers of type parameters, and code generation tools like plugins and macros that, with trailing comma support, wouldn't have to worry about a special condition for the last element when generating comma-separated lists.
```

Any function that takes more than one argument would have a comma-separated argument list; the salient point is that now these APIs can have _variable_ numbers of type parameters.

## Proposed solution

This proposal adds support for trailing commas in comma-separated lists when there's a clear terminator, which are the following:

> - Tuples and tuple patterns 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Tuples and tuple patterns.
```

(For consistency)

```swift
(1, 2,)
let block: (Int, Int,) -> Void = { (a, b,) in  }
let (a, b,) = (1, 2,)
for (a, b,) in zip(s1, s2) { }
```

> - Declaration and call site for arguments lists of initializers, functions, associated values, built-in attributes, expression macros, attached macros and availability spec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Parameter and argument lists of initializers, functions, enum associated values, expression macros, attributes, and availability specs.
```

Calling out "built-in attributes" and "attached macros" would suggest that property wrappers (for example) aren't supported...and I assume they are, yes? If so, I suggest generalizing to "attributes."

Clarification: are built-in macros like `#colorLiteral` supported?

Another clarification (possibly most appropriate to mention in detailed design): if a built-in attribute or macro always supports only one argument, is a trailing comma supported? For example, is `#selector(MyViewController.tappedButton,)` valid?

Author: I hadn't thought about these cases but I tried and both `#colorLiteral` and `#selector` parsers with trailing comma. I think the c++ parser is really general about how it parses `#` expressions.

Reviewer: Sure, the important thing from a proposal perspective is that the text specifies the behavior, but we can clarify during or after review.

```swift

func foo(a: Int, b: Int,) { }

foo(a: 1, b: 1,)

struct S {
    init(a: Int, b: Int,) { }
}

enum E {
    case foo(a: Int, b: Int,)
}

@Foo(1, 2, 3,) 
struct S { }

f(_: @foo(1, 2,) Int)

#foo(1, 2,)

struct S {
    #foo(1, 2,)
}

if #unavailable(iOS 15, watchOS 9,) { }

```
- Subscripts, including key path subscripts.

```swift
let value = m[x, y,]

let keyPath = \Foo.bar[x,y,]  

f(\.[x,y,])
```

- `if`, `guard` and `while` condition lists.

```swift
if a, b, { }
while a, b, { }
guard a, b, else { }
```

- `switch` case labels.

```swift
switch number {
    case 1, 2,:
        ...
    default:
        ..
}
```

- Closure capture lists.

```swift
{ [a, b,] in }
```

- Inheritance clauses.

```swift
struct S: P1, P2, P3, { }
```

- Generic parameters.

```swift
struct S<T1, T2, T3,> { }
```

- Generic `where` clauses.

```swift
struct S<T1, T2, T3> where T1: P1, T2: P2, { }
```

- String interpolation

```swift
let s = "\(1, 2,)"
```

## Detailed Design

> Trailing comma will be supported in comma-separated lists whenever there is a terminator clear enough that the parser can determine the end of the list. The terminator can be the symbols like `)`, `]`, `>`, `{` and `:`, a keyword like `where` or a pattern code like the body of a `if`, `guard` and `while` statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trailing commas will be supported in comma-separated lists whenever there is a terminator clear enough that the parser can determine the end of the list. The terminator can be the symbols like `)`, `]`, `>`, `{` and `:`, a keyword like `where` or a pattern code like the body of a `if`, `guard` and `while` statement.
```

Note that the requirement for a terminator means that the following cases will not support trailing comma:

Enum case label lists:

```swift
enum E {
  case a, b, c, // ❌ Expected identifier after comma in enum 'case' declaration
}
```

> Inheritance clauses for associated type in a protocol declaration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inheritance clauses for associated types in a protocol declaration:
```

```swift
protocol Foo {
  associatedtype T: P1, P2, // ❌ Expected type
}
```

> Generic `where` clauses for initializers and functions in protocol declaration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generic `where` clauses for initializers and functions in a protocol declaration:
```

```swift
protocol Foo {
  func f<T1, T2>(a: T1, b: T2) where T1: P1, T2: P2, // ❌ Expected type
}
```

> Trailing comma will be allowed in single-element lists but not in zero-element lists, since the trailing comma is actually attached to the last element. Supporting a zero-element list would require supporting _leading_ commas, which isn't what this proposal is about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trailing commas will be allowed in single-element lists but not in zero-element lists, since the trailing comma is actually attached to the last element. Supporting a zero-element list would require supporting _leading_ commas, which isn't what this proposal is about.
```

```swift
(1,) // OK
(,) // ❌ expected value in tuple
```

## Source compatibility

Although this change won't impact existing valid code it will change how some invalid code is parsed. Consider the following:

```swift
if
  condition1,
  condition2,
{ // ❌ Function produces expected type 'Bool'; did you mean to call it with '()'?
  return true
} 

{ print("something") }
```

> Currently the parser uses the last comma to determine that whatever follows is the last condition, so `{ return true }` is a condition and `{ print("something") }` is the `if` body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the parser uses the last comma to determine that whatever follows is the last condition, so `{ return true }` is a condition and `{ print("something") }` is the `if` body.

```

# Allow trailing comma in comma-separated lists

- Proposal: SE-NNNN
- Author: Mateus Rodrigues
- Review Manager: TBD
- Status: Awaiting Review
- Implementation: [swift](https://github.com/mateusrodriguesxyz/swift/commit/114b3b4ba1440d6f681b7b5f1086633b504eb2fb), [swift-syntax](https://github.com/mateusrodriguesxyz/swift-syntax/commit/17d3123f1868f450c878cb017403c4c686e8fc86)
- Review: [pitch](https://forums.swift.org/t/pitch-allow-trailing-comma-in-tuples-arguments-and-if-guard-while-conditions/70170/48)

## Introduction

This proposal aims to allow the use of trailing commas, currently restricted to array and dictionary literals, in more comma-separated lists.

## Motivation

### Development Quality of Life Improvement

A trailing comma is an optional comma after the last item in a list of elements:

```swift
let rank = [
  "Player 1",
  "Player 3",
  "Player 2",
]
```

> Using trailing commas makes it easy to add, remove, reorder and comment in/out elements, without the need to add or delete the comma while doing any of these manipulations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift's support for trailing commas in array and dictionary literals makes it as easy to append, remove, reorder, or comment out the last element as any other element.
```

To be precise, the benefits have to do with the _last_ element of a list, not other elements. So perhaps something like this? Also, it is a bit pedantic, but one can try to _use_ a trailing comma but if it's not supported then it's not easy...

Consider the following SwiftUI modifier:

```swift
func frame(
    width: CGFloat? = nil,
    height: CGFloat? = nil,
    alignment: Alignment = .center
) -> some View
```

`frame(width:)`, `frame(height:)`, `frame(width:alignment:)`, `frame(height:alignment:)`, `frame(width:height:)`, `frame(width:height:alignment:)` are all valid calls but you can't easily switch between `frame(width:)` and `frame(width:alignment:)` by commenting in/out `alignment` without adding/removing the trailing comma.

```swift
.frame(
    width: 500,
//    alignment: .leading
) // ❌ Unexpected ',' separator

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion—I'd start the shift from your first example of something already supported (array literals) to the present motivation with a sentence to introduce this shift, like: "Other comma-separated lists in the language could also benefit from the flexibility enabled by trailing commas." You have a sentence at the end of this section that probably would work here.

It's permitted certainly to mention SwiftUI as an example, but if there's an example that applies more broadly than Apple platforms and app development, it's arguably preferable. For example, you could choose an API from the standard library, swift-algorithms, etc.

If you choose a well known enough API, you also wouldn't have to provide the declaration and list all the overloads: just the call site and the error that results would be sufficient.

> The introduction of [parameter packs](https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution/blob/main/proposals/0393-parameter-packs.md) allows more APIs that are comma-separated lists at call site and would benefit from trailing comma.

Reviewer: Before this sentence, I would move the acknowledgment you have written below about SE-0084. You can write that a narrower proposal was reviewed and rejected, but since that time the language has evolved substantially that change the basis for rejection.

That would include not just evolution in prevailing code style, but also the point here that we have introduced parameter packs, but also the following point that we have introduced code generation tools.

```swift
extension [S] {
    func sorted<each T: Comparable>(_ keyPath: repeat KeyPath<S, each T>) { }
}

arrayOfS.sorted(
  \.a, 
  \.b,
//  \.c
) // ❌ Unexpected ',' separator

> ```

Reviewer: It isn't necessary to demonstrate how parameter packs work in this proposal, I think.

> Since [#21381](https://github.com/apple/swift/pull/21381) has been merged back in 2019 **enum associated values** supports default values and are a good fit for trailing comma as well.

Reviewer: I don't understand this point. Why do default values for enum associated values need to be called out here?

**Multiple conditions** in `if`, `guard` and `while` are also comma-separated list and add, remove, reorder and comment in/out are not uncommon practice during development.

```swift
if 
   condition1,
   condition2,
//   condition3
{ // ❌ Cannot convert value of type '() -> ()' to expected condition type 'Bool'
                    
} // ❌ Expected '{' after 'if' condition

> ```

Reviewer: I don't think this needs to be called out separately. It starts to read like an incomplete version of the proposed solution.

These benefits can be extended to other comma-separated lists found in the Swift language.

### Code Generation

> **Plugins** and **Macros** have made it possible to generate code using swift and trailing comma would allow generate lists without worrying about a special condition for the last element.

Reviewer: See comment above.

### Code Diff

> A tangential motivation is that trailing comma makes version-control diffs cleaner.

Reviewer: If it is tangential, maybe better to leave it out? If we make editing less messy, then clearly the diff will also be cleaner: they are two sides of the same coin and the point is made adequately above.

Without trailing comma:
```diff
foo(
-  a: Int
+  a: Int,
+  b: Int
)
```
With trailing comma:
```diff
foo(
  a: Int,
+  b: Int,
)
```

> [!NOTE]  

> > A similar proposal was [rejected](https://forums.swift.org/t/rejected-se-0084-allow-trailing-commas-in-parameter-lists-and-tuples/2777) back in 2016 for Swift 3. It's been 8 years since that, the swift language has evolved a lot, some changes highlighted above as motivation, and the code style that "puts the terminating right parenthesis on a line following the arguments to that call" has been widely adopted by community, swift standard library codebase, swift-format, docc documentation and Xcode. Therefore, not encourage or endorse this code style doesn't hold true anymore nor is a reason for rejection.

Reviewer: See comment earlier about moving this reference up. Also, please link directly to the proposal and not just to the decision note.

## Proposed solution

> This proposal adds support for trailing comma for comma-separated lists, but only when there's a clear terminator. A enum case label list won't support, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal adds support for trailing commas in comma-separated lists when there's a clear terminator, which are the following:
```

Please list those here; probably table format is fine. I don't think this section should start first with an example of what's _not_ supported although that should be included in the proposal, including the ambiguity that arises if it is supported.

```swift
enum E {
  case a, b, c, // ❌ Expected identifier after comma in enum 'case' declaration
}
```

> Trailing comma will be allowed in the following comma-separated lists:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

See comment above.

- Tuples and tuple patterns 

```swift
(1, 2,)
let block: (Int, Int,) -> Void = { (a, b,) in  }
let (a, b,) = (1, 2,)
for (a, b,) in zip(s1, s2) { }
```

> **Trailing comma will be allowed in single-element lists but not in zero-element lists.**

Reviewer: Proposals are expected to have a "Detailed design" section, and I think these details—which are extremely useful and needed!—about single-element tuples versus zero-element tuples go best there. The details should come with a rationale; in this case, supporting a zero-element list would require supporting _leading_ commas, which isn't what this proposal is about (nor probably could we do it).

I would suggest that details about places in the grammar that don't have a clear terminator and the parsing ambiguities we need to avoid by continuing not to support trailing commas there could go into the "Detailed design" section as well.

```swift
(1,) // OK
(,) // ❌ expected value in tuple
```

> - Initializers, functions and associated values arguments and parameters

Reviewer: Sorry, there are two "ands" here—did you mean to comma-separate some of these? :wink:

Reviewer: Also, it looks like you're showing only declarations, rather than call sites. Perhaps worth showing both kinds of examples.

```swift

> m[x, y,]

Reviewer: This looks like a subscript example, but subscripts are mentioned below, no here...

func foo(a: Int, b: Int,) { }

struct S {
    init(a: Int, b: Int,) { }
}

enum E {
    case foo(a: Int, b: Int,)
}
```
- Subscripts

```swift
let value = m[x, y,]
```

> - `KeyPath` subscripts 

Reviewer: They may be a totally distinct case within swift-syntax, but I think most Swift end users would expect subscripts (the bullet point above) to include key path subscripts, no?

To such a reader, this separate bullet point would seem redundant—perhaps this could be consolidated into one ("Subscripts, including key path subscripts" or something like that)?

```swift
let keyPath = \Foo.bar[x,y,]
          
f(\.[x,y,])
```

> - Attributes arguments

Reviewer: Similar comment for this and the following. I understand that you've had to handle separate cases in the implementation, but to end users they're all argument lists, I think.

It would seem logical that use sites for expression macros including built-in ones such as `#colorLiteral(...)`, attached macros, property wrappers, and built-in attributes all would fit under one heading of "argument lists"—although of course it is important to spell it out.

```swift
@Foo(1, 2, 3,) struct S { }
f(_: @foo(1, 2,) Int)
```

- Macro expansion arguments

```swift
#foo(1, 2,)

struct S {
    #foo(1, 2,)
}
```

> - `if`, `guard` and `while` conditions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `if`, `guard` and `while` condition lists
```

I *think* that's what they're called, yes?

```swift
if a, b, { }
while a, b, { }
guard a, b, else { }
```

- `switch` case labels

```swift
switch number {
    case 1, 2,:
        ...
    default:
        ..
}
```

> - Closure capture list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Closure capture lists
```

You've used plural elsewhere, so this would just be for consistency.

```swift
{ [a, b,] in }
```

> - inheritance list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Inheritance clauses
```

```swift
struct S: P1, P2, P3, { }
```

> **Inheritance lists won't support trailing comma when there isn't a clear terminator, such as `associatedtype` in a protocol declaration:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Inheritance lists won't support trailing commas when there isn't a clear terminator, such as in `associatedtype` declarations in a protocol:**
```

"Such as" worries me here: do you have a concrete list or description of all the places they're not supported?

```swift
protocol Foo {
  associatedtype T: P1, P2, // ❌ Expected type
}
```

- Generic parameters

```swift
struct S<T1, T2, T3,> { }
```

> - Generic `where` clause list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Generic `where` clauses
```

```swift
struct S<T1, T2, T3> where T1: P1, T2: P2, { }
```

> **Generic `where` clause lists won't support trailing comma when there isn't a clear terminator, such as functions in protocol declaration:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Generic `where` clause lists won't support trailing commas when there isn't a clear terminator, such as functions in protocol declarations:**
```

Same comment as above re "such as."

```swift
protocol Foo {
  func f<T1, T2>(a: T1, b: T2) where T1: P1, T2: P2, // ❌ Expected type
}
```

> - Availability spec list

Reviewer: As above re attributes and macros, `#available` and `#unavailable` argument lists would seem to fall into the same category as other argument lists for the end user.

```swift

> if #unavailable(iOS 15, watchOS 9,) { }

Reviewer: Point of clarification: since `*` is (required to be?) at the end of these lists if used, can you give an example (maybe best in the "Detailed design" section) regarding whether `#available(iOS 9999, *,)` will be supported—in other words, a trailing comma after `*`?

```

- String interpolation

```swift
let s = "\(1, 2,)"
```

## Source compatibility

> Although this change won't impact existing valid code it will change how some invalid codes are parsed. Consider the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this change won't impact existing valid code it will change how some invalid code is parsed. Consider the following:
```

```swift
if
  condition1,
  condition2,
{ // ❌ Function produces expected type 'Bool'; did you mean to call it with '()'?
  return true
} 

{ print("something") }
```

> Currently the parser uses the last comma to determine that whatever follows is the last condition, so `{ return true }` is a condition and `{ print("something") }` is the if body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently the parser uses the last comma to determine that whatever follows is the last condition, so `{ return true }` is a condition and `{ print("something") }` is the `if` body.
```

> To allow trailing comma the proposed solution is to change the parser to terminate de condition list before the first block that is a valid if body, so `{ return true }` will the parsed as the if body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With trailing comma support, the parser will terminate the condition list before the first block that is a valid `if` body, so `{ return true }` will the parsed as the `if` body and `{ print("something") }` will be an unused closure expression.
```

```swift
if
  condition1,
  condition2,
{
  return true
} 

{ print("something") } // ❌ Closure expression is unused
```

## Alternatives considered

### Eliding commas

> A different approach to address the exact same motivation is to allow the comma between two expressions to be elided when they are separated by a newline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A different approach to address similar motivations is to allow the comma between two expressions to be elided when they are separated by a newline.
```

They don't have to be the "exact same" motivation, or at least it's not necessary for you to argue that they're the exact same motivations here.

```swift
print(
    "red"
    "green"
    "blue"
)
```

> This was even [proposed](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0257-eliding-commas-from-multiline-expression-lists/22889/188) and returned to revision back in 2019.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was even [proposed](https://forums.swift.org/t/se-0257-eliding-commas-from-multiline-expression-lists/22889/188) and returned for revision back in 2019.
```

> Even though both approach are not mutually exclusive, this proposal is about consistently extend an existing behavior in the language while eliding comma is a more serious change to the language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two approaches are not mutually exclusive. There remain unresolved questions about how the language can accommodate elided commas, and adopting this proposal does not prevent that approach from being considered in the future.
```
